Proposed Algorithm
==================
I've made several attempts at doing a simple strategy.
This is what I'm working towards now.

There are three sections to the drill:

      1) the New Set
	  2) the Working Set
	  3) the Maintenance Set

The New Set is the set of all the new vocabulary
that haven't been seen before. When you reset a drill
it puts everything into the New Set.

The Working Set is used to memorize the vocabulary.
The drill walks you through the various aspects
of the vocabulary and quizzes you on each of them.
When you have gotten each of the aspects right enough
times, it promotes the vocabulary into the Maintenance
set.

Initially the Working Set will be empty.  It can hold up
to 10 (configurable) pieces of vocabulary.  If the Working Set
is not full, it will automatically draw a vocabulary from either
the New Set or the Maintenance Set.  How it decides is based
on the following algorithm.

   if the Maintenance Set is empty, then an item from the New Set
      will be chosen.
   if New Set is empty, then an item from the Maintenance Set will
      be chosen.
   if Maintenance Set is "Reviewed" then an item from the New Set
      will be chosen.
   otherwise an item from the Maintenance Set is chosed.

Whether or not the Maintenance Set is "Reviewed" is described later.

The Maintenance Set holds items that have already made their
way through the Working Set at least once.  They are sorted
according to an estimate of how likely the user is to forget
the item (described below) -- Most likely to forget is at the top of
the set.

When an item is taken from the Maintenance Set it is taken
from the top of the set.  The item is quizzed.  If the answer
is correct, the item is inserted back into the Set (see below)
and the next item is chosen.  If the answer is wrong, the
item is moved the the Working Set and normal quizzing
resumes.

If the user answers 8 (configurable) items in a row from the 
Maintenance Set correctly, the Set is "Reviewed".  This status
is retained until the next time the application is run.

When an item is inserted into the Maintenance Set (whether
from being promoted from the Working Set, or being
correctly reviewed from the Maintenance set), it is
inserted according to it's "scheduled time".

The "scheduled time" is set to 2 times the time that has
elapsed since the previous correct response.  If the previous
response wasn't correct, then the "scheduled time" is
set to 1 day (configurable).

It is important to understand that the "scheduled time" is
not necessarily the time that the user will review the
item.  It is merely used as a ranking function within the
Maintenance Set.  The reason it is a time is to deal with
potential starvation issues with high probability items.
Eventually, over time, all items will make their way
to the top.

Working Set
===========
The working set has 3 levels.  Level 1 will be a reading
problem.  Level 2 will be a meaning problem.  Finally
level 3 will be a kanji problem.  If there is no kanji
for the vocabulary, level 3 will be skipped.  The item
will be promoted to the Maintenance set directly.

Once all levels have been passed, the vocabulary moves
into the Maintenance set.  When a question is answered
wrong, the item is moved to the next lower level (level 1
being the lowest possible).

Items that were answered incorrectly in the Maintenance
set will be placed at level 1 in the working set.

The working set has 2 decks: the drawing deck and
the discard deck.  An item is drawn from the top of
the drawing deck.  Unless it is promoted to the
Maintenance set, it is inserted randomly into the
discard deck.  The *last* card answered from the
drawing deck is placed in the *last* position in
the discard deck.  Then  the discard deck is used
as the drawing deck.  All items put into the
Working set are placed randomly into the
discard deck.

The levels in the Working set are not saved.  The
items return to level 1 when the application is reloaded.
